STADVDB
MCO2: Transactions, Concurrency and Recovery

Release Date: 24 October 2025
Final Due Date: 29 November 2025

Project Description
The course project on Transactions Management is a venue for students to practice building a distributed
database system that supports concurrent multi-user access. Students will once again use the MCO1 dataset to
design a three-node distributed database system where they perform concurrent transactions and simulate
crash and recovery techniques. The final output will be (1) a deployed web application that will be
demonstrated during the indicated schedule to the respective STADVDB teachers, and fully tested using a test
script showing the results of performing the different test cases described below on your software, and (2) a
technical report documenting all decisions involved in setting up the nodes, simulating global concurrency
control, simulating global crash and recovery, as well as the results and findings from performing the test scripts.
"A distributed database management system (DDBMS) ensures that changes, additions, and
deletions performed on the data at any given location are automatically reflected in the data
stored at all the other locations. Therefore, every user always sees data that is consistent with
the data seen by all the other users."
Methodology
Students are to form teams with 3 - 4 members who should be under the same instructor. Indicate your
groupings in AnimoSpace People – MCO2. To proceed with this project, each team should conduct the following:
Step 1.

Read Exercise 5: Distributed Databases
Exercise 5 points you to resources and guide questions in setting up your distributed database system
and in designing your web application that includes provisions for data replication and recovery
facilities towards supporting concurrent transaction processing while maintaining the database in a
consistent state. Your answers in this exercise will comprise part of your MCO2 Technical Report.

Step 2.

Build a Distributed Database System
Create and deploy three (3) nodes – with three (3) separate computers that are connected and can
communicate with each other. Each node should have its own database with the following contents:
§ Node 1 (Central Node): All rows in the main database
§ Node 2: Partition of rows based on a specified database fragmentation criterion
§ Node 3: Partition of rows based on a specified database fragmentation criterion
Notes:
§ Only 1 table with limited columns from the original dataset is needed for this project.
§ Referencing Exercise 5, design a homogeneous DDB where all nodes employ the same database
schema. To implement data fragmentation, Nodes 2 and 3 should not contain overlapping
rows. When combined, they yield the full set of rows found in Node 1.
§ A web application should be loaded into each node to manage the accessibility of the database
across multiple sites.

Step 3.

Concurrency Control and Consistency
Create and deploy a web application to simulate concurrency control and replication for the
distributed system. The application should be able to show two or more concurrently executing
STADVDB – MCO2 Transactions Management 1

transactions in two or more nodes and they all leave the database in a consistent state. Simulate
concurrency and replication for each of the following three (3) cases and report the results:
a. Case #1: Concurrent transactions in two or more nodes are reading the same data item.
b. Case #2: At least one transaction in the three nodes is writing (update / deletion) and the
others are reading the same data item.
c. Case #3: Concurrent transactions in two or more nodes are writing (update / deletion) on the
same data item.
Notes:
• Test each case on each of the following isolation levels: read uncommitted, read committed,
read repeatable and serializable. For this particular application, which isolation level supports
the highest volume of concurrent transactions while leaving the database in a consistent state?
Justify your choice and document your findings in the technical report.
• You must code your own replication and update strategies. Updates in either Node 2 or Node 3
should be replicated in the central node. Any updates in the central node should be replicated in
either Node 2 or Node 3. Refer to Exercise 5.
• How is data transparency supported by your data replication and update strategy?
Step 4.

Global Failure Recovery
Extend the web application to simulate global crash and recovery. Show how the distributed system
recovers from failures when concurrent transactions are executing. Simulate the system operations
(what the web application will do) and report the results of the following four (4) cases:
a. Case #1: When attempting to replicate the transaction from Node 2 or Node 3 to the central
node, the transaction fails in writing (insert / update) to the central node.
b. Case #2: The central node eventually recovers from failure (i.e., comes back online) and missed
certain write (insert / update) transactions.
c. Case #3: When attempting to replicate the transaction from central node to either Node 2 or
Node 3, the transaction fails in writing (insert / update) to Node 2 or Node 3.
d. Case #4: Node 2 or Node 3 is eventually recovers from failure (i.e., comes back online) and
missed certain write (insert / update) transactions.
Notes:
§ You must code your own recovery strategy.
§ The web application must be deployed using the provided CCS Cloud or other 3rd party servers.
§ How are users shielded from node failure? When a node fails, how does your data replication
strategy support the continued availability of the web application?
§ How does your data replication strategy support recovery of the distributed DB from failure?
§ What happens during a recovery operation?

Step 5.

Evaluation
Write a test script to cover all the test cases described in Steps 3 and 4. Execute each of your test cases
at least 3 times and log the results. Remember that testing should be efficient and effective. The test
script should be submitted as part of the Appendix of your Technical Report.

Step 6.

Technical Report
Prepare your documentation. Include all design decisions -- setting up the distributed database,
simulating the global concurrency, replication strategy, recovery strategy, test methods and results.
STADVDB – MCO2 Transactions Management 2

Technical Report
Use the prescribed template and follow the outline provided below to prepare your Technical Report. The
Technical Report should be at least 4 pages and at most 10 pages excluding References and Appendix.
1. Introduction.
▪ Give a general overview of distributed databases and their usage.
▪ Then narrow down to your specific use case -- what is your paper all about, why build a distributed
database, how does your web application manage the access to the distributed database across the 3
nodes?
▪ Cite related literature for your definition of terms.
2. Distributed Database. Using Exercise 5 Distributed Databases as your guide,
▪ Present the setup of your distributed database, the data stored in each node, and the application use
case (functionalities).
▪ Is the DB homogeneous or heterogeneous? How is data replicated and fragmented across the nodes?
▪ Give an overview of the update and recovery mechanism of your distributed database as a prelude to
Sections 3 and 4.
▪ Provide illustrations and diagrams as necessary to support and increase the clarity of your discussion.
▪ Cite related literature to support your design decisions.
▪ Creatively use supporting diagrams to increase the clarity of your discussion.
3. Concurrency Control and Consistency.
Update Strategy. Referencing Exercise 05,
▪ Describe your update strategy to maintain database consistency such that updates in either Node 2 or
Node 3 are replicated in the central node, and any updates in the central node are replicated in either
Node 2 or Node 3? Is it a master-slave or a multi-master setup, or some other setup? Justify.
▪ Illustrate with the use of an algorithm (not source code).
▪ Which isolation level (read uncommitted, read committed, read repeatable and serializable) is most
appropriate for your web application to support the highest volume of concurrent transactions while
leaving the database in a consistent state? Justify your decision based on your experiments.
▪ How is data transparency supported by your data replication and update strategy?
Methodology. Explain how you simulated concurrency control.
▪ Describe the setup of your experiments.
▪ Show the concurrent transactions used to simulate the experiment / test cases.
▪ How did you validate that the concurrency control, replication and update strategies such that these
will leave the database in a consistent state?
▪ Show your test results and give your analysis.
▪ Use tables and diagrams accordingly to present your setup, test cases, test data, and test results.
Discussion. Discuss key insights from your replication and update strategies and analysis of results must
be supported by citing relevant literature, i.e., how do your results confirm those reported in prior works?
4. Global Failure Recovery.
Recovery Strategy.
STADVDB – MCO2 Transactions Management 3

▪ Why is there a need for recovery strategies?
▪ What happens during a recovery operation? What facilities did you build to support your distributed
database during a recovery operation?
▪ For each of the node failure cases, how does your data replication strategy support the recovery of
your distributed database system from failure?
▪ Illustrate with the use of an algorithm (not source code).
Methodology. Explain how you simulated recovery from failure.
▪ Describe the setup of your experiments.
▪ Present the test cases you used to simulate each of the test cases in global failure recovery.
▪ How did you validate the correctness of your recovery strategy?
▪ Show your results and give your analysis.
▪ Use tables and diagrams accordingly to present your setup, test cases, test data, and test results.
Discussion. Discuss key insights from your recovery strategies and analysis of results must be supported
by citing relevant literature, i.e., how do your results confirm those reported in prior works?
5. Discussion. Share your learnings and insights from the conduct of your experiments / simulations.
▪ Focus on two key aspects -- (i) concurrency and update strategy, and (ii) recovery strategy.
▪ What is the importance of distributed databases?
▪ How do proper isolation levels allow transactions to be executed concurrently?
▪ Why are data fragmentation and replication necessary? How do these affect data consistency
and recovery?
▪ How do data replication benefit users even when a node fails?
▪ How is data transparency supported by your data replication and update strategy?
▪ What facilities need to be in place to support node recovery?
▪ Cite relevant references to further support your discussion.
6. Conclusion. Gives (a short recap of your project) with the key strategies employed, and relevant findings.
7. References. Reviewing literature on distributed databases, concurrency control and recovery strategies
should be conducted to help you in doing your project and writing your paper.
8. Declarations. Academic honesty reflects your true character and personal values. In this part of the paper,
please provide the following.
9.1 Declaration of Generative AI Usage. “During the development of the project and the preparation of the
report, the developers / authors used the following AI tools for the indicated tasks:
If single AI tool, indicate the [AI tool] and the list of tasks, e.g.,
§ Define (Explain) concepts such as star and snowflake, dimensional hierarchy, types of transformation
§ Suggest a list of analytical reports
§ Paraphrasing and grammar checking
If multiple AI tools, prepare a 2-column table
[AI Tool 1] Tasks
[AI Tool 2] Tasks

STADVDB – MCO2 Transactions Management 4

After using the indicated tools, the developers / authors reviewed and edited the AI output and take full
responsibility in explaining, justifying, critiquing and using the output of AI.”

9.2 Record of Contribution. Indicate the contributions in the software development and paper writing of
each member of the team.
Final Deliverables
The following final deliverables are required to be submitted on November 29, 2025 through AnimoSpace. The
specific date for project presentation will be provided by your instructor:
1. Technical Report
2. Source Code
3. Test Script with results (follow CSSWENG / STSWENG / SOFENGG / INTROSE format)
4. Presentation Slides
§ Late submissions will receive 10 points deduction per day late. No submission will be accepted after
December 03, 2025.
§ Submissions with incomplete requirements (technical report with TurnItIn check; source code, test script,
and presentation slides) will receive corresponding deductions accordingly.
§ Prepare for a 20-minute live presentation of your distributed database setup and the various strategies you
employed.
§ Follow a presentation script and do not exceed the indicated time limit
§ Focus on the distributed DB setup, update and replication algorithms, recovery algorithms
§ Show proof of implementation by presenting the results from the execution of each test case
§ Show proof of algorithm implementation through software demo
§ End your presentation with your insights and learnings from the project
§ Project presentations will be from November 29 – December 05. The actual schedule will be provided by your
respective teacher.
§ The web application and database must be deployed via the CCS Cloud or any 3rd party cloud server.
§ Be ready to show your distributed database setup, including your database schema, SQL query
statements, and source code.
§ Members who are absent will be given a grade of 0.
§ Members may receive individualized grading depending on contribution of work and ability to answer
questions during the presentation.
Plagiarized works – works copied from others and AI generated content – will automatically be given a grade
of 0.0 for the course.

STADVDB – MCO2 Transactions Management 5

Grading Rubric

Distributed Database Software and Presentation [50 pts]
Exemplary
Building
Distributed
Database

a [6] Setup 3 accessible nodes on separate
cloud machines; Each node contains the
indicated instance of the DB, with correct
fragmentation and replication; Web app is
loaded onto each node

Satisfactory

Inadequate

[4] Setup 3 accessible nodes on a single
machine; Each node contains the indicated
instance of the DB, but flawed
fragmentation and replication; Web app
deployment has flaws

[2] The entire DB runs on a single node and
is not distributed.

Concurrency
Control –
Algorithm /
Strategy

[6] Sound global update and
replication strategies to
transparently maintain
consistency across the entire
cluster

[3] Minor flaw in the update
and/or replication strategy
employed for transparent
consistency

Concurrency
Control –
Simulation

[10] For the 3 cases:
-- clear method employed in
designing and executing the
experiment
-- sound testing of isolation
levels

[7] Minor flaw in
-- simulating 1-2 test cases
-- partial testing of isolation
levels

Global Failure
Recovery –
Algorithm /
Strategy

[6] Proper facilities in place to support the
continued availability of the DDB;
Sound error recovery strategy

Global Failure
Recovery Simulation

[10] For the 3 cases:
-- clear method employed in
designing and executing the
experiment
-- sound testing of isolation levels

[0] Students relied on 3rd party
tool; Cannot explain how it
works and the rationale for the
choice | No replication
strategy
[4] Major flaw in
-- simulating 1-2 test cases
-- no experiment to support
choice of isolation levels

[3] Does not properly recover from any
form of failure; Web app cannot function
properly when a node fails

[7] Minor flaw in
-- simulating 1-2 test cases
-- partial testing of isolation
levels

[2] Concurrency simulation in
the localhost only; DB only
updates the local nodes and
does not keep the entire cluster
updated

[0] Students relied on 3rd party tool;
Cannot explain how it works and the
rationale for the choice | No recovery
strategy

[4] Major flaw in
-- simulating 1-2 test cases
-- no experiment to support
choice of isolation levels

[2] Concurrency simulation in the
localhost only; DB only updates the
local nodes and does not keep the
entire cluster updated

STADVDB – MCO2 Transactions Management 6

Presentation –
Scope and
Method

[6] Concise presentation of setup and
simulation, and challenges
❏ DB Schema, Web apps
❏ Update and Replication strategy
❏ Recovery strategy

[4] Explains system setup and strategies
(update, replication, recovery), but some
parts of the discussion lack details

[2] Vague discussion of the system setup,
algorithm design, justification for the
strategies, and limitations

Presentation Organization

[6] Concise presentation of the results and
insights gained from the project
❏ Method, Results
❏ Insights, Conclusion

[4] Explains the simulation methods,
results and insights but some parts of the
discussion lack details and are not fully
evident from the experiments

[2] Vague discussion of the simulation
methods, results and insights that are not
supported by the experiments

Technical Report [50 pts]
Methodology

[10] Clear, concise and thorough discussion:
(1) DDB setup, fragmentation and replication
decisions, with supporting related work;
(2) web app to manage the access to the
distributed database;
(3) experiment to simulate global
concurrency, replication, and recovery,
showing evidence of critical and reflective
thinking

[7] Description of the decisions made for the
DDB setup, fragmentation and replication
decisions; web application for data access;
experiment are
-- insufficient (missing important details)
-- not properly supported by relevant
literature

[4] Superficial, vague and/or incomplete
discussion, lacking evidence of critical
thinking and supporting related work

Concurrency
Control Strategy

[10] Appropriate
-- isolation level to support the highest
volume of concurrent transactions;
-- update and replication strategies and
justified based on RRL and evaluation
method

[7] Employed strategies properly addresses
at least one case of concurrent read/update;
Demonstration and discussion is sufficient
but not thorough

[4] Vague description of update and
replication control;
Insufficient demonstration of how
concurrency control is enforced and how the
system maintains consistency

Global Failure
Recovery
Strategy

[10] Employed strategies properly recover
from transaction and node failures;
-- able to perform replication after node
recovers
-- discussion sufficiently describes the
situation

[7] Presence of flaws in the employed
strategies;
Discussion describes the situation but not
thorough

[4] Vague description of global failure
recovery;
Insufficient description of how global failure
recovery is enforced and how the system
recovers from failure

STADVDB – MCO2 Transactions Management 7

Analysis and
Discussion of
Results

[10] Careful thought and reflection is evident
in presenting the analysis and the insights
gained from the test results and conduct of
the activity;
Findings are supported by sound
experiments and analysis of results

[7] Can be further enriched by sharing
insights and lessons learned from the
conduct of the activity;
Missing test results;
Discussion lacks depth

[4] Incomplete and/or ambiguous discussion
of insights and lessons gained from the
results and the experience

Language and
Format

[10] Evidence of careful choice of words and
use of correct grammar;
Properly follows ACM publication format;
Proper citations and references;
Overall evident care in preparing the report,
with appropriate diagrams and tables

[7] Has minor flaws in the choice of words
and/or grammar;
Minor flaw in the use of prescribed template;
Missing some citations and/or references;
Missing references to Tables/Figures

[4] Numerous issues in choice of words and
grammar;
Non-compliance with prescribed template;
Missing important references and citations

STADVDB – MCO2 Transactions Management 8

